# Lesson 1 - Introduction

The book reference is the one by Pavel Pavzner.

[Basically everything the professor said is in the slides]

## Introduction to thinking with algorithms
[This seems a long way to explain alignment]

Imagine a two player game, where there are two piles of rocks. Each player may either take one rock from a pile, or a rock from two piles.
In this simple game, we can come up with strategies. For example, if there are 2 rocks in each of the two piles (2+2), the second player always wins.

For larger values of `n+n` games, the winning strategy gets harder and harder to predict.

Imagine drawing a table, where the `(i, j)` move represents the move that a player must take when they are faced with a number of rocks equal to `i` and `j`.

> The 10+10 table is in the slides

Why is it important to know how the algorithms work? When you know how a procedure works, you can:
- Be confident that it is what you actually want it to do;
- You can know how quickly it runs, and if it is useful on your data;
- Tweak the parameters of the algorithm to better adapt it to your needs;

## What are algorithms?

A algorithm is a set of actions that can be performed by an entity to reach a purpose. In computer science, the entity is a computer. A computer can understand actions to perform through a *programming language*, a specific set of possible instructions that can be ran by the computer.

We will use a simple way to describe the steps of an algorithm, using something called *pseudocode*. Pseudocode is not a real programming language, but it approximates one. We can get a general gist of what the actual program will look like, but without knowledge or the burden of writing full-fledged code.

In pseudocode, we use the concepts of variables, arrays and arguments:
- A variable, `x`, contains some value.
- An array, `X`, contains a series of variables, like `a1, a2, ... an`.
- An *argument* is an input an algorithm needs to function, for instance the data it needs to operate on.
- Invoking, or *calling* an algorithm looks something like this `max(1, 99)`. The name of the algorithm called is first, followed by the arguments it needs.
- When we `return` from the algorithm, we output the return value (`return x`), or simply end the function (`return`).

We can perform a few things:
- Assignment, e.g. `x = 2`;
- Algebra on numbers (`+ - * ^ /`);
- Control flow:
  - **IF**: "If A is true, then B. Otherwise, C" Where A is a boolean value (TRUE or FALSE), and B, C are instructions.
  - **FOR**: "For i in A, B". Where A is an array, and B is a set of instructions.
  - **WHILE**: "While A, B". Where A is a boolean value, and B is a set of instructions.

Some example of simple algorithms:

Euclidian distance between two points:
```
DIST(x1, y1, x2, y2):
    dx = (x2 - x1)^2
    dy = (y2 - y1)^2
    return (dx + xy)^0.5
```

Maximum among two numbers:
```
MAX(a, b):
    if a < b:
        return b
    else:
        return a
```

Sum of sequential integers between 1 and n
```
SUMINT(n):
    sum = 0
    for i in [1, ..., n]:
        sum = sum + 1
    return sum
```

Return the number of values of the sequence `[1, ..., Inf]` that need to be added to get to just above `b`:
```
ADDUNTIL(b):
    i = 1
    total = 1
    while total < b:
        i = i + 1
        total = total + i
    return i
```

> A longer example of a pseudocode program is in the slides, but it makes little sense other than showing more code.

Biological constructs "implement" a sort of collection of algorithms. In fact, any process can be explained by a set of (pseudocode) instructions.

## Algorithm Design
To create a new algorithm, one needs to first define precisely what the problem is. We must also require some performance from the algorithm:
- It must take a "useful" amount of time: it would be useless if takes a million years to finish;
- It must give the correct answer;
- It would be useful if it could be extended to any problem of the same type.

## The change problem

>> This is the exact same thing as the book.

