# Introduction to modelling - Prof. Beccuti

FAIR data is data that is F, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable.

The section by Prof. Beccuti will cover:
- Modelling in computational Systems Biology;
- Tools for modelling, like EPIMOD, GreatSPN and their fusion, GReatMod.
- Practical exercises with GreatSPN.

## Modelling in computer science

A biological system is a complex system. We typically consider this system as a collection of components and their interactions ("holistic" point of view).
Through math and computer science, we can model these complex biological systems. These digital representations of the organism can be used for many things, for example predicting what candidate drugs are the best to use, or what could be going wrong in a disease or to model the spread of a disease (and organize the best response).

Modelling also forces you to create a specific, human and machine-readable, clear representation of the system you are studying, and this process forces you to consider potential missing knowledge of the system.

A *model* is an abstract representation of an object or a process. For instance:
- A Ts65DN mouse is a model for human Down syndrome;
- A reaction network is a model for a real reaction;
- A set of differential equations is a model for the evolution of a process.

Creating a model is a very complex task. Usually, the processing of creating the model causes you to have to change the modelling plan itself, in a sort of loop.

Modelling is usually a multidisciplinary task, where each individual can bring in their knowledge and expertise to answer different questions.

Biological models can usually be broken down to smaller and smaller models, covering portions of the whole (e.g. an organ > tissue > cell > molecule > atoms).

## How to make a model

We have to start with the right assumption, and most importantly the definition of a clear, defined biological question.

- Formulate the problem;
- Research the available knowledge and data;
- Selection of the best model structure;
- Model creation;
- Sensitivity analysis/parameter estimation and model calibration;
  - The model has to take into account the error of the associated data that is used by the model. We usually test this by introducting small fluctuations in the input data, and see what happens to the model. If a single parameter has a large effect on the model, we have to measure that data with very high precision. We could also get rid of parts of the model, as they may not have any effects. Some parameters may be completely missing, and need to be estimated from the observed *function* of the model.
- Model validation.
