# Modelling in Computational Biology, part 2

The formalism that is chosen for the models is highly dependent on the experimental question that is trying to be answered by the model.

"Statistical" models are based on data and can be used to describe the data.
However, they are unsuited for simulation.
For instance, we cannot test hypotheses on "statistical" models.

"Mechanistic" models require some understanding on the mechanism at the basis of the phenomena.
Once the model is set, they can then be tuned on the real data to model it.
After tuning, however, we can test what happens if the model parameters are changed through simulation.
An example of these sort of models are Petri Nets.

## Modelling types
There are three canonical ways that can be used to model a system in a "mechanistic" way:
- Interaction-based: This is just a list of objects and their connections. These models are relatively simple, as they require no stoichiometric data, they are static, and require no parameters to tune. However, they have limited usage.
- Constraint-based: These models require stoichiometric (i.e. `1xA + 1xB -> C`) information regarding the interactions between the items. For instance, a set of chemical reactions can be modelled this way.
- Mechanism-based: This model needs stoichiometric and kinetic parameters (i.e. the speed of the "reactions") to be generated, but they can then calculate or simulate the over-time state of the system.

Models may be deterministic or stochastic. An example of a determistic model is a set of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs). Solving the equations can give you a sense of the average trend of the model.
An example of a stochastic model is a Markov chain. They introduce randomness during the runtime of the model. They can then be queried both for the average (over many runs) and also on the variability over the average.

Markov chains can be either in discrete or continuous time. Discrete chains have an event at every time step. Continuous time chains have to associate with each transaction not only an average probability but also a distribution of the probability of the event occurring in time.

Markov chains can be very easily parallelized.

## Petri Nets

Petri nets are a graphical formalism that can be destructured to a set of ODEs which, when solved, can produce the state of the system.

The net is made of circles representing *places* and rectangles representing *transitions*. Each place can contain tokens representing units that belong in that place. Links between places and transitions can model the possible ways that the units can move between the places.
Each transition is associated with a rate, representing the average number of triggers in one time unit. It is an *average* as in fact the transitions fire based on a negative exponential function, with that average trigger.

